FINAL
FATF-VII

ANNEX 1

FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE ON
MONEY LAUNDERING

THE FORTY RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE
ON MONEY LAUNDERING

28 June 1996
1

Introduction
1.
The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) is an inter-governmental body whose
purpose is the development and promotion of policies to combat money laundering — the processing of criminal
proceeds in order to disguise their illegal origin. These policies aim to prevent such proceeds from being utilised
in future criminal activities and from affecting legitimate economic activities.
2.
The FATF currently consists of 26 countries1 and two international organisations2 . Its membership
includes the major financial centre countries of Europe, North America and Asia. It is a multi-disciplinary body as is essential in dealing with money laundering - bringing together the policy-making power of legal, financial and
law enforcement experts.
3.
This need to cover all relevant aspects of the fight against money laundering is reflected in the scope of
the forty FATF Recommendations — the measures which the Task Force have agreed to implement and which all
countries are encouraged to adopt. The Recommendations were originally drawn up in 1990. In 1996 the forty
Recommendations were revised to take into account the experience gained over the last six years and to reflect the
changes which have occurred in the money laundering problem.3
4.
These forty Recommendations set out the basic framework for anti-money laundering efforts and they are
designed to be of universal application. They cover the criminal justice system and law enforcement; the financial
system and its regulation, and international cooperation.
5.
It was recognised from the outset of the FATF that countries have diverse legal and financial systems and
so all cannot take identical measures. The Recommendations are therefore the principles for action in this field,
for countries to implement according to their particular circumstances and constitutional frameworks allowing
countries a measure of flexibility rather than prescribing every detail. The measures are not particularly complex
or difficult, provided there is the political will to act. Nor do they compromise the freedom to engage in legitimate
transactions or threaten economic development.
6.
FATF countries are clearly committed to accept the discipline of being subjected to multilateral surveillance and peer review. All member countries have their implementation of the forty Recommendations monitored
through a two-pronged approach: an annual self-assessment exercise and the more detailed mutual evaluation
process under which each member country is subject to an on-site examination. In addition, the FATF carries out
cross-country reviews of measures taken to implement particular Recommendations.
7.

These measures are essential for the creation of an effective anti-money laundering framework.

1

Reference in this document to “countries” should be taken to apply equally to “territories” or “jurisdictions”. The twenty six FATF member countries and governments are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United
Kingdom, and the United States
2

The two international organisations are: the European Commission and the Gulf Cooperation Council.

3

During the period 1990 to 1995, the FATF also elaborated various Interpretative Notes which are designed
to clarify the application of specific Recommendations. Some of these Interpretative Notes have been updated in
the Stocktaking Review to reflect changes in the Recommendations.

2

THE FORTY RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE FINANCIAL ACTION
TASK FORCE ON MONEY LAUNDERING
A. GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
1.

Each country should take immediate steps to ratify and to implement fully, the 1988 United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (the Vienna Convention).

2.

Financial institution secrecy laws should be conceived so as not to inhibit implementation of these
recommendations.

3.

An effective money laundering enforcement program should include increased multilateral cooperation and mutual legal assistance in money laundering investigations and prosecutions and
extradition in money laundering cases, where possible.

B. ROLE OF NATIONAL LEGAL SYSTEMS IN COMBATING MONEY LAUNDERING
Scope of the Criminal Offence of Money Laundering
4.

Each country should take such measures as may be necessary, including legislative ones, to enable it
to criminalise money laundering as set forth in the Vienna Convention. Each country should extend
the offence of drug money laundering to one based on serious offences. Each country would
determine which serious crimes would be designated as money laundering predicate offences.

5.

As provided in the Vienna Convention, the offence of money laundering should apply at least to
knowing money laundering activity, including the concept that knowledge may be inferred from
objective factual circumstances.

6.

Where possible, corporations themselves - not only their employees - should be subject to criminal
liability.
Provisional Measures and Confiscation

7.

Countries should adopt measures similar to those set forth in the Vienna Convention, as may be
necessary, including legislative ones, to enable their competent authorities to confiscate property
laundered, proceeds from, instrumentalities used in or intended for use in the commission of any
money laundering offence, or property of corresponding value, without prejudicing the rights of
bona fide third parties.
Such measures should include the authority to : 1) identify, trace and evaluate property which is
subject to confiscation; 2) carry out provisional measures, such as freezing and seizing, to

3

prevent any dealing, transfer or disposal of such property; and 3) take any appropriate investigative
measures.
In addition to confiscation and criminal sanctions, countries also should consider monetary and civil
penalties, and/or proceedings including civil proceedings, to void contracts entered into by parties,
where parties knew or should have known that as a result of the contract, the State would be prejudiced in its ability to recover financial claims, e.g. through confiscation or collection of fines and
penalties.

C. ROLE OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM IN COMBATING MONEY
LAUNDERING
8.

Recommendations 10 to 29 should apply not only to banks, but also to non-bank financial institutions. Even for those non-bank financial institutions which are not subject to a formal prudential
supervisory regime in all countries, for example bureaux de change, governments should ensure that
these institutions are subject to the same anti-money laundering laws or regulations as all other
financial institutions and that these laws or regulations are implemented effectively.

9.

The appropriate national authorities should consider applying Recommendations 10 to 21 and 23 to
the conduct of financial activities as a commercial undertaking by businesses or professions which
are not financial institutions, where such conduct is allowed or not prohibited. Financial activities
include, but are not limited to, those listed in the attached annex. It is left to each country to decide
whether special situations should be defined where the application of anti-money laundering measures is not necessary, for example, when a financial activity is carried out on an occasional or
limited basis.
Customer Identification and Record-keeping Rules

10. Financial institutions should not keep anonymous accounts or accounts in obviously fictitious
names: they should be required (by law, by regulations, by agreements between supervisory authorities and financial institutions or by self-regulatory agreements among financial institutions) to
identify, on the basis of an official or other reliable identifying document, and record the identity of
their clients, either occasional or usual, when establishing business relations or conducting transactions (in particular opening of accounts or passbooks, entering into fiduciary transactions, renting of
safe deposit boxes, performing large cash transactions).
In order to fulfill identification requirements concerning legal entities, financial institutions should,
when necessary, take measures:
(i) to verify the legal existence and structure of the customer by obtaining either from a public
register or from the customer or both, proof of incorporation, including information concerning
the customer’s name, legal form, address, directors and provisions regulating the power to bind
the entity.

4

(ii) to verify that any person purporting to act on behalf of the customer is so authorised and identify
that person.
11. Financial institutions should take reasonable measures to obtain information about the true identity
of the persons on whose behalf an account is opened or a transaction conducted if there are any
doubts as to whether these clients or customers are acting on their own behalf, for example, in the
case of domiciliary companies (i.e. institutions, corporations, foundations, trusts, etc. that do not
conduct any commercial or manufacturing business or any other form of commercial operation in
the country where their registered office is located).
12. Financial institutions should maintain, for at least five years, all necessary records on transactions,
both domestic or international, to enable them to comply swiftly with information requests from the
competent authorities. Such records must be sufficient to permit reconstruction of individual transactions (including the amounts and types of currency involved if any) so as to provide, if necessary,
evidence for prosecution of criminal behaviour.
Financial institutions should keep records on customer identification (e.g. copies or records of
official identification documents like passports, identity cards, driving licenses or similar documents), account files and business correspondence for at least five years after the account is closed.
These documents should be available to domestic competent authorities in the context of relevant
criminal prosecutions and investigations.
13. Countries should pay special attention to money laundering threats inherent in new or developing
technologies that might favour anonymity, and take measures, if needed, to prevent their use in
money laundering schemes.
Increased Diligence of Financial Institutions
14. Financial institutions should pay special attention to all complex, unusual large transactions, and all
unusual patterns of transactions, which have no apparent economic or visible lawful purpose. The
background and purpose of such transactions should, as far as possible, be examined, the findings
established in writing, and be available to help supervisors, auditors and law enforcement agencies.
15. If financial institutions suspect that funds stem from a criminal activity, they should be required to
report promptly their suspicions to the competent authorities.
16. Financial institutions, their directors, officers and employees should be protected by legal provisions
from criminal or civil liability for breach of any restriction on disclosure of information imposed by
contract or by any legislative, regulatory or administrative provision, if they report their suspicions
in good faith to the competent authorities, even if they did not know precisely what the underlying
criminal activity was, and regardless of whether illegal activity actually occurred.

5

17. Financial institutions, their directors, officers and employees, should not, or, where appropriate,
should not be allowed to, warn their customers when information relating to them is being reported
to the competent authorities.
18. Financial institutions reporting their suspicions should comply with instructions from the competent
authorities.
19. Financial institutions should develop programs against money laundering. These programs should
include, as a minimum :
(i) the development of internal policies, procedures and controls, including the designation of com
pliance officers at management level, and adequate screening procedures to ensure high stan
dards when hiring employees;
(ii) an ongoing employee training programme;

(iii) an audit function to test the system.
Measures to Cope with the Problem of Countries with No or Insufficient Anti-Money Laundering Measures
20. Financial institutions should ensure that the principles mentioned above are also applied to branches
and majority owned subsidiaries located abroad, especially in countries which do not or insufficiently apply these Recommendations, to the extent that local applicable laws and regulations
permit. When local applicable laws and regulations prohibit this implementation, competent authorities in the country of the mother institution should be informed by the financial institutions that they
cannot apply these Recommendations.
21. Financial institutions should give special attention to business relations and transactions with persons, including companies and financial institutions, from countries which do not or insufficiently
apply these Recommendations. Whenever these transactions have no apparent economic or visible
lawful purpose, their background and purpose should, as far as possible, be examined, the findings
established in writing, and be available to help supervisors, auditors and law enforcement agencies.
Other Measures to Avoid Money Laundering
22. Countries should consider implementing feasible measures to detect or monitor the physical crossborder transportation of cash and bearer negotiable instruments, subject to strict safeguards to
ensure proper use of information and without impeding in any way the freedom of capital movements.
23. Countries should consider the feasibility and utility of a system where banks and other financial
institutions and intermediaries would report all domestic and international currency transactions
above a fixed amount, to a national central agency with a computerised data base, available to
competent authorities for use in money laundering cases, subject to strict safeguards to ensure
proper use of the information.
6

24. Countries should further encourage in general the development of modern and secure techniques of
money management, including increased use of checks, payment cards, direct deposit of salary
checks, and book entry recording of securities, as a means to encourage the replacement of cash
transfers.
25. Countries should take notice of the potential for abuse of shell corporations by money launderers
and should consider whether additional measures are required to prevent unlawful use of such
entities.
Implementation, and Role of Regulatory and other Administrative Authorities
26. The competent authorities supervising banks or other financial institutions or intermediaries, or
other competent authorities, should ensure that the supervised institutions have adequate programs
to guard against money laundering. These authorities should co-operate and lend expertise spontaneously or on request with other domestic judicial or law enforcement authorities in money laundering investigations and prosecutions.
27. Competent authorities should be designated to ensure an effective implementation of all these
Recommendations, through administrative supervision and regulation, in other professions dealing
with cash as defined by each country.
28. The competent authorities should establish guidelines which will assist financial institutions in
detecting suspicious patterns of behaviour by their customers. It is understood that such guidelines
must develop over time, and will never be exhaustive. It is further understood that such guidelines
will primarily serve as an educational tool for financial institutions’ personnel.
29. The competent authorities regulating or supervising financial institutions should take the necessary
legal or regulatory measures to guard against control or acquisition of a significant participation in
financial institutions by criminals or their confederates.

D. STRENGTHENING OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
Administrative Co-operation
Exchange of general information
30. National administrations should consider recording, at least in the aggregate, international flows of
cash in whatever currency, so that estimates can be made of cash flows and reflows from various
sources abroad, when this is combined with central bank information. Such information should be
made available to the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements to
facilitate international studies.
31. International competent authorities, perhaps Interpol and the World Customs Organisation,
should be given responsibility for gathering and disseminating information to competent authori
ties about the latest developments in money laundering and money laundering
7

techniques. Central banks and bank regulators could do the same on their network. National
authorities in various spheres, in consultation with trade associations, could then disseminate this to
financial institutions in individual countries.
Exchange of information relating to suspicious transactions
32. Each country should make efforts to improve a spontaneous or “upon request” international information exchange relating to suspicious transactions, persons and corporations involved in those
transactions between competent authorities. Strict safeguards should be established to ensure that
this exchange of information is consistent with national and international provisions on privacy and
data protection.
Other forms of Co-operation
Basis and means for co-operation in confiscation, mutual assistance and extradition
33. Countries should try to ensure, on a bilateral or multilateral basis, that different knowledge standards in national definitions - i.e. different standards concerning the intentional element of the
infraction - do not affect the ability or willingness of countries to provide each other with mutual
legal assistance.
34. International co-operation should be supported by a network of bilateral and multilateral agreements
and arrangements based on generally shared legal concepts with the aim of providing practical
measures to affect the widest possible range of mutual assistance.
35. Countries should be encouraged to ratify and implement relevant international conventions on
money laundering such as the 1990 Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure
and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime.
Focus of improved mutual assistance on money laundering issues
36. Co-operative investigations among countries’ appropriate competent authorities should be encouraged. One valid and effective investigative technique in this respect is controlled delivery related to
assets known or suspected to be the proceeds of crime. Countries are encouraged to support this
technique, where possible.
37. There should be procedures for mutual assistance in criminal matters regarding the use of compulsory measures including the production of records by financial institutions and other persons, the
search of persons and premises, seizure and obtaining of evidence for use in money laundering
investigations and prosecutions and in related actions in foreign jurisdictions.
38. There should be authority to take expeditious action in response to requests by foreign countries to
identify, freeze, seize and confiscate proceeds or other property of corresponding value to such
proceeds, based on money laundering or the crimes underlying the laundering activity. There should
also be arrangements for coordinating seizure and confiscation proceedings which may include the
sharing of confiscated assets.

8

39. To avoid conflicts of jurisdiction, consideration should be given to devising and applying mechanisms for determining the best venue for prosecution of defendants in the interests of justice in cases
that are subject to prosecution in more than one country. Similarly, there should be arrangements
for coordinating seizure and confiscation proceedings which may include the sharing of confiscated
assets.
40. Countries should have procedures in place to extradite, where possible, individuals charged with a
money laundering offence or related offences. With respect to its national legal system, each
country should recognise money laundering as an extraditable offence. Subject to their legal frameworks, countries may consider simplifying extradition by allowing direct transmission of extradition
requests between appropriate ministries, extraditing persons based only on warrants of arrests or
judgements, extraditing their nationals, and/or introducing a simplified extradition of consenting
persons who waive formal extradition proceedings.

Annex to Recommendation 9: List of Financial Activities undertaken by business or professions
which are not financial institutions
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public.
Lending.1
Financial leasing.
Money transmission services.
Issuing and managing means of payment (e.g. credit and debit cards, cheques, traveller’s
cheques and bankers’ drafts...).
Financial guarantees and commitments.
Trading for account of customers (spot, forward, swaps, futures, options...) in:
(a) money market instruments (cheques, bills, CDs, etc.) ;
(b) foreign exchange;
(c) exchange, interest rate and index instruments;
(d) transferable securities;
(e) commodity futures trading.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Participation in securities issues and the provision of financial services related to such issues.
Individual and collective portfolio management.
Safekeeping and administration of cash or liquid securities on behalf of clients.
Life insurance and other investment related insurance.
Money changing.

1

Including inter alia
- consumer credit
- mortgage credit
- factoring, with or without recourse
- finance of commercial transactions (including forfaiting)

9

